"And at me," said Walter, "as if he were about to shake his head and
rebuke me for some suspected iniquity. But so does the original. I
shall never feel quite comfortable under his eye till we stand before
him to be married."

They now heard a footstep on the floor, and, turning, beheld the
painter, who had been some moments in the room and had listened to a
few of their remarks. He was a middle-aged man with a countenance well
worthy of his own pencil. Indeed, by the picturesque though careless
arrangement of his rich dress, and perhaps because his soul dwelt
always among painted shapes, he looked somewhat like a portrait
himself. His visitors were sensible of a kindred between the artist
and his works, and felt as if one of the pictures had stepped from the
canvas to salute them.

Walter Ludlow, who was slightly known to the painter, explained the
object of their visit. While he spoke a sunbeam was falling athwart
his figure and Elinor's with so happy an effect that they also seemed
living pictures of youth and beauty gladdened by bright fortune. The
artist was evidently struck.

"My easel is occupied for several ensuing days, and my stay in Boston
must be brief," said he, thoughtfully; then, after an observant
glance, he added, "But your wishes shall be gratified though I
disappoint the chief-justice and Madame Oliver. I must not lose this
opportunity for the sake of painting a few ells of broadcloth and
brocade."

The painter expressed a desire to introduce both their portraits into
one picture and represent them engaged in some appropriate action.
This plan would have delighted the lovers, but was necessarily
rejected because so large a space of canvas would have been unfit for
the room which it was intended to decorate. Two half-length portraits
were therefore fixed upon. After they had taken leave, Walter Ludlow
asked Elinor, with a smile, whether she knew what an influence over
their fates the painter was about to acquire.

"The old women of Boston affirm," continued he, "that after he has
once got possession of a person's face and figure he may paint him in
any act or situation whatever, and the picture will be prophetic. Do
you believe it?"

"Not quite," said Elinor, smiling. "Yet if he has such magic, there is
something so gentle in his manner that I am sure he will use it well."

It was the painter's choice to proceed with both the portraits at the
same time, assigning as a reason, in the mystical language which he
sometimes used, that the faces threw light upon each other.
Accordingly, he gave now a touch to Walter and now to Elinor, and the
features of one and the other began to start forth so vividly that it
appeared as if his triumphant art would actually disengage them from
the canvas. Amid the rich light and deep shade they beheld their
phantom selves, but, though the likeness promised to be perfect, they
were not quite satisfied with the expression: it seemed more vague
than in most of the painter's works. He, however, was satisfied with
the prospect of success, and, being much interested in the lovers,
employed his leisure moments, unknown to them, in making a crayon
sketch of their two figures. During their sittings he engaged them in
conversation and kindled up their faces with characteristic traits,
which, though continually varying, it was his purpose to combine and
fix. At length he announced that at their next visit both the
portraits would be ready for delivery.

"If my pencil will but be true to my conception in the few last
touches which I meditate," observed he, "these two pictures will be my
very best performances. Seldom indeed has an artist such subjects."
While speaking he still bent his penetrative eye upon them, nor
withdrew it till they had reached the bottom of the stairs.

Nothing in the whole circle of human vanities takes stronger hold of
the imagination than this affair of having a portrait painted. Yet why
should it be so? The looking-glass, the polished globes of the
andirons, the mirror-like water, and all other reflecting surfaces,
continually present us with portraits--or, rather, ghosts--of
ourselves which we glance at and straightway forget them. But we
forget them only because they vanish. It is the idea of duration--of
earthly immortality--that gives such a mysterious interest to our own
portraits.

Walter and Elinor were not insensible to this feeling, and hastened to
the painter's room punctually at the appointed hour to meet those
pictured shapes which were to be their representatives with posterity.
The sunshine flashed after them into the apartment, but left it
somewhat gloomy as they closed the door. Their eyes were immediately
attracted to their portraits, which rested against the farthest wall
of the room. At the first glance through the dim light and the
distance, seeing themselves in precisely their natural attitudes and
with all the air that they recognized so well, they uttered a
simultaneous exclamation of delight.